Getting Used to R, Rstudio, Rmd…and more
================
NAME
8/21/2020

Before doing this, review the **Welcome** and **Git** lecture set slides
from <https://sites.google.com/view/biostats/bioenv-2100/welcome> and
the **1\_intro\_data\_lecture.R** script in the lecture\_files folder of
the [CUNY-BioStats github
repository](https://github.com/jsgosnell/CUNY-BioStats).

## Getting your first repository

At this point I’m assuming you received an invitation to view the
assignment on github classroom and accepted it. You now have a private
repository of these files. In addition to working on R, we’ll have you
connect your first project on Rstudio to this repository and work on
some basic git skills.

To start working on the assignment, open RStudio (on your desktop or
cloudserver). Select file, new project, Version control. On the next
screen select git. Next you’ll need to enter the url for your
repository. Look for the Code button (usually green) in your githbub
repository (where you may be reading this…).

![alt
text](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/MaHOb5gRNS2_3I6FT5G7Lkt6dyKnctzSZRgkQH0g7P8xsN_BhDMVdv4-iF872dT6HgWxiqdV-7dWW8OMgzNpNQTDXtFIyN9Xk238N1QHUHXYIvxWSQH43xPpI9Ug60sjVV_K-OeEOEEqrowVXvEmlfu5ODvU9gldiMtso9n6HNHw6Q1TE_g3xxxIE_laf8Mg-sw1-yQ2p0Mffd8avPk3VTGSnIDYWrrBC856HB0lY5cZ2Dhpdki5aB_9sP15-xfDmhA4w-QsW3s4AbbirT-k3_E__qT5wI-CRglEBYNI-Z1Os1QVpzqUpv48Vc7ki0vfPQeKQwJZequE7jRXgSDRwq4uZE8BepVILtLMQ7HzhYRNBAvprMhpgxLnNJ1qXXJ_MmHGQjcRJ0P_12cAhdbG3Jw0KFj2sHnsARF08Ou20giVnda7ioXqRl6CB_caANTgMKK2REOuB01IXLM1zGr2aquiRYxuqkjkH5AVVJud_LbhGBWJN6cGhxoM74uhYkvr7mK-e2Yc6TeObpq0IUMkHcqHCA3Qzk3sCUcuKZzXDDPiwAWvWZVW_VQsSTV95QDO6IR5ZhZrNljB8hwUYlBF14Q5xo4pYpTWAmS5tnup2YofILoj37STnTip7EoybNg0PVD0hhh_xbA9V94Ckoc8F3qXiaaPPBVnMshHKwrXsiFGxzvXp8TH4p0fc-MBg6s=w692-h490-no?authuser=0)

Click it, then copy the web url (or click the copy icon). Input that
into the Rstudio Repository URL space. Then name the project (maybe
Assignment 1,2, etc?). The Create project… field can be left blank to
just save all projects into the main directory. Alternatively you can
click Browse and make an Assignments folder if you want. Whatever you
choose, the project will be saved in new folder in that location using
the name you chose.

Now you can start working on the assignment in Rstudio. To view
instructions, open the .Rmd file you want on IN RSTUDIO\! It will be in
the folder for the assignment you are focusing on. Then **Knit** the
file.

![alt
text](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/DB49Jcp6TaNYc0l9TKVYKtbGblhrpf9cklvrauhnZd4eL1tsSktqtXt0psgivfzNf0Ivh5b3jAihm8BslIc9S54VgoTIdGNLR2TbJiagx3b5TSZWMIbwu-NCSszoaHG_Cof5YAPlaYzeEHx8x5Fw1YhpWuniD6vFbia62EO_T0rwNvkk_A6mIS8BWq-yV-A5PHfXwuIS0x7va61UmSuFoCSv-s55VaNCtWHdRgLIhshwvPFXNPlyID2AvczL5_MqXxx1otSmyHlGBRmC-wUXIfW19NadTPLBMUZDPB79yu0GX7qYuAcPC1dz8HYlwPP7iEXokBKh_hoqgOPnKtLlDRR9LxlZ-TkVSszP45CaslIRjQAOcFdEfLtLX5jvYJnzc7Q8ezoYnVirpyPl7BCDkrfdAHTFXYR4aD7SBlMH39eKkXAn-I7Vuu0kTEE_cP0mfyCo4Px5_ngQa_n1GU4KhKkj2E1A4sy2e1eyybTC-mnNTU_PaMXSIDcoAMtZNhwgVEWqWZDNONr83OgsigwNtePGzjQuRP522QGQBoPqXXwpK53CBx6bVIQZyNDru2XoVJCfP_eVRHdyULUYfo05pNBLviCZrmN9dLd6HDMwfinSxA7tJUXLKV-OrSiCe_taExoEiJhzQ33sLA_7K_fHEVKzqC-oO2t8bfPGaobV7SEzSRrnl2EU8gUEZGR6RQI=w378-h109-no?authuser=0)

The **Knit** button saves the file and shows you a rendered copy of the
contents of the editor. You should see your name in the preview in the
**Viewer** tab (typically lower right window area)\! Presto\! You will
see instructions.

Now we’ll start changing the file.  
First, amend the file by replacing the **NAME** spot in the header (top
of the file between the — markers) with your name.

Now click the **Knit** button again. Now you should see your name in the
preview in the **Viewer** tab.

Now lets make our first commit. If you look in the upper right windows,
you should see a *Git* tab. Select it.

![alt
text](https://lh3.googleusercontent.com/YvyebZDw9vUMb019ji-PqrANpVXOaPQiJ0L4QZVildquFhhAyncY4kM9Jh_nDQb3GX8pkn3U1miDBWNnSdPqvmO6IBMjih8VakZPQCU_43LKmwo0Xzl4SUsbxJoOtTPexnu6YbxSnHLPyt_SBsZZ2Q4E31D1xPetdn2Vbk_7yFFXHF1_KkAxTeWTJXfeJpe-cP-pRSRnBNu-JrrZnJmsPuhWjXGBJY2sPWFRaYwA69GOIdSDYWCFGQgOEp6QcQ3cpqKLOjlC03dBz7lEBeHXLddtYeO3vUy_KR51_zNSW0wfKysAXGbAo0qKIPM_Z--Vmzppdf0XmE7UqevE0oxVwgJSn0bH9DnDpMF1e2nI5h-68skIQ8ESbcUtZoiLDVPhJ9MW6ZYo9lwWmkSColhZQ6KLkNxGZ91PRHNEiq6EGRYBcXbE0ZUfujpXTNpyXOzpHa_XOaRwD5VPT6iTCl3TMWACdJIHuWecDv_1ZJkkvICztAW_TdCR6lc285vzatZQReiG1I1WQoJdbRHcu_zRbrsy2QE0uAFg8P0uXw49Lvhogbu1Wvje6B9BVaQjemoVYKmk3qpAES48CQAFi_mdYhCmKMKeL0q5k6v26IxsX98ojXFb_CEEItQehC5Bop2hdE97Uy5egshwAUyEdlKryeMC1zGSebD-8EQ8z-UtgsKHsCyci_S8U7kabjNlmY0=w533-h108-no?authuser=0)

Notice it has several files. These are the files you have changed or
created since you started working. Click the checkbox next to the files,
and select **Commit**. You’ll need to enter a description. Put “My first
commit\!” and press Commit.

Now you’ve saved a snapshot of the file to your local Rstudio instance
(on your own machine or server). If you go the **Git** tab and select
**Diff** and then **History** on the pop-you, you can select the commit,
select any file you made, and actually see the changes. We’ll only focus
on the .Rmd files. That’s the one you are writing. The others (the .md
in this case) are made automatically and produce the document you see
when you preview the file and when you view it on github.

Now you need to push these changes to the cloud so I can see (and grade)
them. From the **Git** tab, select **Push**. A window should appear.
When it’s done (white text shows) go to your github repository (on the
web). Open the folder for this assignment and click on the .md file. It
should preview, and you should see the updated file with your name\!
Congratulations\!

As you work, use commits to save snapshots of your work in a version
control manner, and pushes to share them with me. If you get stuck, you
can also push your file up so I can see it and help you fix it (much
better than “My code isn’t working). Then you can actually see”how" I
fixed it. The code will also be useful for assessments.

Now let’s start working in R.

## R subtleties and functions

1.  Let x be defined by

<!-- end list -->

``` r
x <- 1:10
```

Try executing this chunk (in R studio, not the webview) by clicking the
*Run* button within the chunk or by placing your cursor inside it and
pressing *Ctrl+Shift+Enter*.

This will run the code in the Console. You may need to switch to Console
(from Rmarkdown) in the lower right window area to see this. The
executed code is also displayed in your processed file (hit **Knit**
again to see this\!).

Note running this chunk has added an object named `x` to the
**Environment** tab area (top right area of screen). But nothing was
“returned” in the console. You prove this by typing `x` in the
console. What does it return?

Determine what the “:” does\! Complete the following sentence:

The : means FILL THIS IN.

2.  Now try to guess the output of these commands

<!-- end list -->

  - length(x)
  - max(x)
  - x\[x \< 5\]
  - x^2
  - x\[ x \< 8 & x \> 2\]

INSERT AN R CHUNK HERE AND RUN EACH OF THESE COMMANDS. Add a new chunk
by clicking the *Insert Chunk* button on the toolbar or by pressing
*Ctrl+Alt+I*. Then state what each of these does.

3.  Is `-1:2` the same as `(-1):2` or `-(1:2)`? INSERT AN R CHUNK HERE
    AND RUN EACH OF THESE COMMANDS. Then state what each of these does.

## Data input, plotting, and tests

You can read in a dataset from the internet following this protocol.

``` r
sleep <- read.csv("https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jsgosnell/CUNY-BioStats/master/datasets/sleep.csv")
```

Run this chunk and note it has added an object named `sleep` to the
environment.

Info on the dataset is viewable @
<http://www.statsci.org/data/general/sleep.html>.

4.  How many rows does the **sleep** data set have (hint: `?dim`)? What
    kind of data is stored in each variable?

ENTER ANSWERS HERE. ADD ANY R CHUNKS YOU USED TO FIND THE ANSWER.

5.  Change the column named *BodyWt* to *Body\_weight*”\* in the sleep
    dataset.

ADD ANY R CHUNKS YOU USED TO COMPLETE THE TASK.

6.  Produce a plot of how *TotalSleep* differs between primates and
    other species. What is this plot showing?

NOTE YOU CAN ADD A PLOT TO THE DOCUMENT TOO\! AMEND THE BELOW AS NEEDED.

``` r
plot(cars)
```

![](1.-Getting-Used-to-R_files/figure-gfm/unnamed-chunk-3-1.png)<!-- -->

7.  The **sleep** dataset begs to have a linear model fit for it. Let’s
    consider. First plot how *TotalSleep* is explained by *BrainWt*. Are
    there any issues with the data? Exclude any outlier and fit a linear
    model to obtain the p-value for the model (hint: summary()). What
    does this imply?

ENTER ANSWERS HERE. ADD ANY R CHUNKS YOU USED TO FIND THE ANSWER.

**EXTRA QUESTIONS** *not required*

![alt
text](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/94/Puffin_Mrkoww.jpg)
**Dow Puffin** *Matthew Zalewski / CC BY
(<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0>)*

8.  Sometimes data doesn’t have headers (column names),so you have to
    add them. Download a dataset on alcids (birds like puffins and
    auklets) from
    <http://csivc.csi.cuny.edu/Lisa.Manne/files/classes/biol78002/alcids55.csv>.
    You’ll need to modify the read.csv function by specifying `header =
    False`, then use the `names` function to name the columns \[“year”,
    “a1\_abund”, “NAO”, “a2\_abund”, “a3\_abund”, “a4\_abund”,
    “a5\_abund”, “a6\_abund”\]. Try it and check your input using the
    `head` command.

ENTER ANSWERS HERE. ADD ANY R CHUNKS YOU USED TO FIND THE ANSWER.

9.  Here’s a sample dataset:

Date, greenness, Richness, habitat 12-25-2009, 13766, 46, forest
01-01-2010, 50513, 60, forest 01-15-2010, 25084, 60, grassland

Enter it into R (manually or via a .csv). (Hint: you have a piece of
this in the code already). Check your input using the head() command.

ENTER ANSWERS HERE. ADD ANY R CHUNKS YOU USED TO FIND THE ANSWER.
